[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> "Thinking Allowed"--
conversations on the leading
edge of knowledge and discovery
with psychologist Jeffrey
Mishlove.
>> Hello, and welcome.
I'm Jeffrey Mishlove.
Today we are going to explore
transforming our relationship
with the Earth.
My guest is Dr. Ralph Metzner--
a professor of psychology
at the California Institute
of Integral Studies.
He is the author
of numerous books,
including "The Psychedelic
Experience," "Maps
of Consciousness," "The Well
of Remembrance," "the Unfolding
Self," "Ayahuasca,"
and "Green Psychology."
He is president of the
Green Earth Foundation.
Welcome, Ralph.
>> Thank you.
>> You point out that
it's really striking,
perhaps even amazing that the
whole discipline of psychology
has attempted to come up with
a theory of mind of the human
being that's sort of completely
isolated from the environment.
>> Right, that struck
me as very interesting.
When you look into
psychology textbooks,
you never see the Earth
mentioned or referred
to or animals, or
anything like that.
And I realized one time that if
we had a psychologist basically
assume everything
important that goes on
in this intrapsychically
or interpersonally.
And we have
psychology of groups.
But that's a function
of the way knowledge
is organized in disciplines.
You say, well, that's
some other department.
But then I realized, well, but
it should make a difference
really that we live on
this Earth in this ecology.
I thought if we lived on Mars,
or if we lived on a spaceship,
our psychology
would be the same.
And that seems weird.
So then I began to
read the writings
of ecological philosophers.
And they, of course, say,
well, yes, ecology is relevant.
Like Ted Roszak said--
and others have said--
well, obviously, we
live in this environment,
this kind of environment,
these kind of ecosystems.
Surely, that makes a difference.
And so eco psychology, or as
I call it, green psychology,
is the beginnings of an
attempt to rethink psychology
to take the ecology
into account.
>> It seems as if there's
something that happened
to the Western psyche perhaps
a few hundred years ago that
caused us to become so alienated
from our fundamental connection
with the planet itself that
we've forgotten about it.
>> Yeah, that's
the key question.
In other words, when you look
at the psychology, so why is it?
And from-- see, the stimulus
to that kind of questioning
comes from the
environmental crisis.
People are waking up to
the fact that well, it's
a man-made crisis.
It's not caused by any other
species or random events,
or outer space, or
anything like that.
So it must be something in
the psychology of human beings
that the way they conceive
of themselves and their
placed in the universe and
what we're supposed to be doing
and how we're supposed
to be related.
Because it can't be right.
It can't be right
that one species gets
to destroy the habitats
for countless thousands
of other species
and degrade life
on the planet
perhaps irreparably
and cause massive change.
That's not adaptive.
That's not sustainable.
So it's human beings
that are doing it.
But then, human beings
have this whole history.
So what is it?
So from a psychological
point of view, I said,
I asked myself the question.
What is the nature
of this split?
How did it come about?
What--
It's the psychopathology.
I have a chapter that I
call the psychopathology
of the human nature
relationship.
And what have we learned from
individual psychopathology that
might apply or
help us understand
this kind of collective
psychopathology
or this dysfunctional
civilization
as Al Gore called it.
And then the additional
question would be, well, OK, so
given what it is, then how did
it come about historically?
And so then you go into history.
And you can trace
that really far back.
And then basically what
are some alternatives
that one could find that would
point a different direction?
>> Well, historically,
if I recall correctly,
you trace our alienation from
the environment back to a point
at which somewhere
in our history,
we determined that we could
dominate the environment rather
than be part of an ecosystem.
>> Yeah, well, many people
have worked on this.
So-- but I actually see it
as having developed in stages
progressively.
The latest, let's say,
going backward in time,
the latest stage
one might say would
be the scientific revolution.
That's what's called the
beginning of the modern age
in the 16th, 15th,
16th century when
we adopted a world view
that was mechanistic,
which didn't allow for--
which didn't treat
nature as having
subjective consciousness.
And beings are simply the
backdrop or resources,
as we now think of it, to
be used for human beings.
And that facilitated a
exploitative attitude
and the rise of the
scientific establishment
was based on a kind of a deal
with science and religion
where science took over
the exploration and then
the management of
the material world
and left all questions of
purpose and value and spirit
and subjectivity to the
church because they had to.
It was a political arrangement.
And so-- but then when it
has been traced for the back
to religious
ideology, particularly
the Judaeo-christian
monotheistic notions
of a transcendental
created deity
who lives in some heaven
far away, separated
from the natural
world, and with that,
then the natural world becomes
mundane or even profane
in other words.
One of the names of the
devil in the medieval times
was Lord of this World.
So the body, nature,
the flesh, they all
have this original sin.
But again, there are
alternative traditions.
And one can trace it
further several other steps
further back.
If you want to go to
the earliest step,
you go with people like
Paul Shepherd, who says--
whom I like very much--
who says well, the
earliest step was really
what it's called domestication
or the agricultural revolution
because when people started
farming and herding instead
of hunting and gathering, when
the hunting and gathering,
they're following nature.
When they're
farming and herding,
they're beginning to
manage and control it.
So that's the big--
>> 20,000 years ago.
>> Well, yeah,
10,000, 12,000 BC.
You know, that's
not that long a time
compared to hundreds
of thousands,
maybe millions of years a
hunter gatherer existence.
So it's actually quite hopeful
to think of it that way.
And again, it doesn't
mean that he's saying
or people like myself are
saying we have to go back
to being hunter gatherers.
But what it does
say is that you want
to go back and try to understand
what was given up then,
certain attitudes, perhaps,
certain values, certain ways
of looking at the world,
that we could do well
to preserve and recapture
even while we live in a,
modern technological world.
>> Now, we're experiencing
an incredible degradation
of the environment now.
Species are going extinct
at an enormous rate.
But in all fairness, these
kinds of cataclysmic changes
have occurred in earlier epochs
without human intervention.
Perhaps we're just
doing nature's work.
>> Right, yeah, that's an
argument that's sometimes made
when people say, oh, well, there
have been extinctions before.
90% of species have been lost.
So just relax and, you
know, keep on polluting.
People say there have been these
five major extinction spasms.
This is the sixth
extinction that we're in.
It is different,
however, because it's
the only one that's caused
by one particular species.
And it is true, I would accept
that argument, in the sense,
from Gaian perspective.
We're not we're not capable
of assuming responsibility
for the planet, for
the fate of the planet.
But from a philosophical,
psychological point of view,
we are responsible for what
we do, both we as individuals,
and we as groups, and
collectives, as a society.
>> Well, it seems to me, based
on current human tendencies,
human psychology, even if we
master one aspect of this,
if we stopped
polluting the waters,
we're likely to
do something else.
It seems like such an
unmanageable problem.
>> Right, yeah, well, that's
what radical ecologists say.
We need to go further than
just attacking it piecemeal,
this issue, or that
issue, that issue.
Although any specific
person, or individual,
or group, of course,
then, you always
have to pick your battles.
But what we're really looking
for is a change in world view,
and a different kind of world,
a bit different basic approach
which would then allow for
these changes to occur.
So the concept of world view, I
think, is very important to me.
And I teach all that.
And part of the psychology of
that, part of the worldview
is, well, how do we
conceive ourselves?
What's our role?
What kind of world
do we live in?
And what is our role?
And that the current world
view, the modern world view
associated with science
is not religious.
Religion, the church--
the Christian Church
was the dominant ideology
in the Middle Ages.
But it's not really anymore.
And the current
worldview basically
sees us as are the
masters of the universe.
We get to do with the planet
whatever we feel like.
And it's called homocentric
or a speciesist prejudice.
And I make the argument,
I follow the argument
of others, who have said
that this assumption
of human superiority, that
we are somehow assuming--
assuming, not demonstrating,
but assuming that we're
superior to all
other forms of life,
all other forms of animals,
and so forth, and therefore,
have the right to do
with other forms of life
whatever we want to.
That's exactly analogous to
racism, sexism, nationalism,
and other forms
of human prejudice
where one group of
human beings assumes--
again, without evidence--
that because they're
superior to this other
group, whatever it may be,
defined in whatever
way, then they
have the right to dominate,
discriminate, against exploit,
or even exterminate.
>> Ralph, we're going
to take a short break.
We'll be back in
just a few moments.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Welcome back to
"Thinking Aloud."
I'm your host, Jeffrey Mishlove.
We are discussing
how we can transform
our precarious
relationship to the Earth.
My guest is Dr. Ralph Metzner,
author of "Green Psychology."
Ralph, we've talked quite
a bit now about the problem
that humans are
facing on this planet
and how deeply rooted
it is in our sense
that we can dominate the planet.
As an alternative,
you do suggest
that we look towards the
values and lifestyles
of indigenous peoples and
other mystical cultures
around the planet.
>> Right, well, it turns out--
so sustainability is an
ecological value concept
that environmentalists
say, we're
trying to find a
sustainable economy,
a sustainable forestry,
sustainable farming.
Which means that you don't
extract the resources at a rate
faster than they
can be replaced.
So that future beings,
human and otherwise,
can also live in that planet.
So then, you look around.
Well, there are these
indigenous people--
we call them indigenous people--
massively being driven to
extinction and an extermination
under the onslaught of the kind
of global capitalist system.
But they have sustainability.
Otherwise, they
wouldn't still be here.
Take California Indians.
Westerners have
been in California
for 200 years, a little
bit more than 200 years.
Before that, California Indians
lived here for 8,000 years.
Now, if that isn't
sustainability, what is?
Not to say that they were
always ecological saints
and did no harm.
They also affected
their environment,
but nothing even remotely
like the scale that
has happened since that time.
So the practices and the values
of indigenous people-- and then
that ties into the
religious dimensions
and the spiritual dimensions.
Because traditional
Earth people tend
to have an attitude where they
see nature as being sacred
or as having subjective
consciousness and deserving,
therefore, of respect.
For example, Native
Americans did not
conceive their environment
as a wilderness.
The Europeans came and said,
oh, well, this is wilderness,
and there's a bunch of savages
running around just wild.
And that's not a concept that
Native American people use.
They said, well, that's all our
relations, all my relations.
So animals, trees,
forests, the spirits
of mountains and rivers, it
was animistic and shamanistic.
What animism means, that it's
animated by living intelligence
that is traditionally
called "spirits."
That's not symbolic.
See, if I'm a Jungian
psychologist, I might say,
well, this is an archetype
or something like that.
The traditional people
didn't use that language.
Why should they?
They said, it's spirit.
It's not a projection of human
consciousness into nature.
It's a perception of
non-human consciousness
in non-human nature,
which is very word.
>> In other words, we're
projecting onto the world
our idea that it's just
kind of mechanistic, inert,
and lifeless.
>> That's right.
That's exactly right.
That's just as
much a projection.
And the usual assumption that
primitive people, so-called,
project human qualities
on the environment
is a complete misperception.
They don't assume that only
humans have consciousness.
Why should they assume that?
They, in fact, say
things like, well,
you know, in ancient
times, humans
used to be able to understand
the language of animals.
And they used to understand us.
We used to have conversations.
And so even the
hunters who would hunt,
they would ask for permission
from the spirit of the animal
that we were hunting.
And they would never
waste anything.
They would take only
what they needed.
And they would use everything
and wouldn't waste.
So that a sustainable-- and
respect, a quality of respect
built into it.
If you regard nature as
just inert background,
you don't have respect.
Why should you?
So that calls for a rethinking
of our basic relationship.
And people come to
that in various ways.
Now, I see the
revival of interest
in shamanism, for example, as
being really parallel to that.
Because shamanism is the oldest
spiritual and healing tradition
on the planet.
And it involves going into an
altered state of consciousness,
whether through
particular plants,
hallucinogenic or
visionary plants,
or through rhythmic drumming,
or through things like fasting,
or isolation, or a vision
quest in the desert
or in the wilderness,
and finding a vision,
finding a healing
power, a connection
to a spiritual power,
which could then
be used by the practitioner
for the purposes of healing,
and divination, or
finding knowledge.
It's always done
through spirits.
It's never done just
for the psychology.
And so that's the
big difference.
Again, see,
traditional worldview
of traditional people--
you could call it "shamanistic,"
and "mystic," also
"panentheistic."
If you used
theological language,
then you would say
panentheism, meaning
that the deity or the divinity
is inherent in everything,
is a worldview that is much
larger than the worldview
that we live in.
Because the worldview
that we live in
recognizes only one level
of reality as being real,
the material level that can be
measured and seen, and touched,
and described with
our instruments.
Everything else is merely--
as we say, merely subjective.
The world of mind, the
world of consciousness,
the worlds of feelings,
intuitions, possible beings,
and all of that.
The traditional
worldview says there
are many worlds, many
levels of consciousness,
many different kinds of
beings in these worlds.
And the material level is
certainly real, but no more
real than the others.
So it's a more
inclusive worldview.
It doesn't say the
material level is unreal.
It's not an idealist
philosophy that
says everything is consciousness
and nothing is really real.
It doesn't say that.
It says there are many
aspects of reality.
>> You point out that
there are about, I think,
600 million indigenous
people still living
in their communities
on this planet.
That's about 10% of
the planet still,
and that their worldview, which
we have treated disparagingly,
is something that we
really desperately need.
They have an important gift that
we should learn how to respect.
>> Right, exactly.
I traveled in Chiapas, Mexico,
and had the opportunity
to visit with some
Lacandon Indians
in Chiapas who are sort of
the descendant of the Mayas.
And they live-- like my European
ancestors lived 5,000 years
ago, in the cultures of
neolithic village cultures
of old Europe--
kind of a mixed farming,
gardening economy, and a world
imbued with spiritual
intelligence,
where they do a lot of
singing, and chanting,
and invocation of
spiritual powers.
And I realized when
I was down there,
we have this terminology
of the first world--
we don't have a
second world anymore,
that was the Soviet Union.
And the third world, we see
these so-called underdeveloped
countries.
And I've come to see what's
called development basically
as a continuation of
colonialism by another name,
economic exploitation and use.
And in the fourth world,
these indigenous people
are very much marginalized.
But actually, I
realized that if you're
going to be
historically accurate,
we should call that
world the first world.
Because they were here first.
And they've been here longest.
And what we call
now the first world
is first only in terms of
military power and domination.
But it's really the latest.
And it's sort of superimposed
on these earlier worlds.
>> The first shall be the last.
And the last shall be the first.
>> That's right, we have a lot
to learn from these people.
And when I was down in that
village, they had television.
Well, they don't
really need television.
This whole idea that they
needed to be developed,
that's an illusion
foisted upon them by--
they were doing just fine.
If left alone, they would
still be doing just fine.
And so there has been this
superstructure of exploitation,
use, and these national
and then multinational
corporations that exploit
the resources to accumulate
ever more wealth.
And so that all needs to change.
And I don't have any illusions
that any one individual
or group can effect
significant change.
But we're here to
do what we can.
And why would we--
we're part of it.
As you say, we are
part of nature, too.
We're not observing
this from some distance
from some other planet.
So you do what we
can, what feels right,
what one ever is motivated
to do the right thing.
And to me, from a
psychological point of view,
the most significant
contribution
I could think of
making would be to help
people change their
thinking and become
more conscious of the implicit
and unconscious assumptions
that we make.
>> You also speak about eco
feminism as a tradition that
suggests that the same way that
we abuse our mother, the Earth,
is how we have been abusing
women in our culture,
that there's a correlation.
>> Yeah, the eco feminists say,
that's one of the movements,
the schools of thought that have
been called radical ecology.
The radical ecologists
say you know
you have to go beyond simply
recycling, and legislation
against pollution, and so forth.
You have to kind
of go to the roots
and really rethink
the world view.
So deep ecology is
a radical ecology,
and so is eco feminism.
The deep ecology says
the root pathology is
this anthropocentric viewpoint.
And it says, instead,
that we should really
recognize that nature
has value in itself.
It has intrinsic value.
It has inherent value,
not just use value for us.
And eco feminism
says the same thing.
And it says, in addition, if
you trace it back historically,
you see one of the roots
of the domination of nature
is the patriarchy, the
beginnings of the patriarchy,
which is about 6,000 years,
ago about 4,000 to 5,000 BC.
BC
It arose in different
parts of the world,
maybe simultaneously.
And exactly how it arose is
an interesting historical
question.
Nobody's really agreed.
But because nature is
usually defined as feminine--
so the patriarchal domination
of nature is not so much men
against women as patriarchal
the institutions of family,
society, and state, which
are completely infused with--
four to five millennia, they
have been completely part
of all of our thinking--
and even our thinking,
even our ideologies.
The ideologies of science
people have pointed out,
eco feminists have pointed out,
that the domination of nature
and the patriarchal domination
of women, and control,
are kind of part and
parcel of the same thing.
And they have to be
challenged and transformed
at the same time because
they support one another.
And then there's
other movements,
other schools of
thought, also, radical,
like social ecologists.
>> Ralph, we'll talk about those
in part two of our two-part
series.
We've covered a lot of ground.
And I encourage our viewers
to check their schedules.
Thanks for being with me.
And thank you for being with us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]